§ 1024.17   Escrow accounts. | Consumer Financial Protection Bureau
Skip to main content
An official website of the
United States government
Español
中文
Tiếng Việt
한국어
Tagalog
Pусский
العربية
Kreyòl Ayisyen
(855) 411-2372
Submit a Complaint
Search
Search
Close
Search
Open the main menu
Close the main menu
Submit a Complaint
Consumer Education
Back
Resources for Yourself
Resources for Helping Others
Consumer Complaint Database
Money Topics
Auto Loans
Bank Accounts & Services
Credit Cards
Credit Reports & Scores
Debt Collection
Fraud & Scams
Money Topics
Money Transfers
Mortgages
Payday Loans
Prepaid Cards
Reverse Mortgages
Student Loans
Featured
Explore guides to help you plan for big financial goals
Additional Resources
Submit a Complaint
Tell Your Story
Order free brochures
Browse Ask CFPB
Rules & Policy
Back
Rules & Policy Overview
Final Rules
Interactive Regulations
Rules Under Development
Notices and Opportunities to Comment
Regulatory Agenda
Petitions for Rulemaking
Competition and Innovation
Advisory Committees
Enforcement
Back
Enforcement Overview
Enforcement Actions
Enforcement by the Numbers
Investigatory Authority
Warning Letters
Payments to Harmed Consumers
Industry Whistleblowers
Compliance
Back
Compliance Overview
Compliance Resources
Advisory Opinion Program
Consumer Financial Protection Circulars
Supervision and Examinations
Supervisory Highlights
Supervisory Guidance
Registration & Submission Programs
Amicus Program
Consumer Complaint Program
Data & Research
Back
Data & Research Overview
Reports
Research Hub
Consumer Complaint Database
Mortgage Database (HMDA)
Small Business Lending Database
Public Data Inventory
Consumer Credit Trends
Mortgage Performance Trends
Financial Well-Being Survey
Credit Card Surveys & Agreements
Prepaid Account Agreements
Featured
Help advance financial well-being
News
Back
Press Releases
Speeches & Op-eds
Testimony
Statements
Blog
Director’s Notebook
Recent Updates
Consumer Advisories
Español
中文
Tiếng Việt
한국어
Tagalog
Pусский
العربية
Kreyòl Ayisyen
(855) 411-2372
/
Interactive Bureau Regulations
/
12 CFR Part 1024 (Regulation X)
Table of Contents
Subpart A - General Provisions § 1024.1–§ 1024.5
§ 1024.1   Designation.
§ 1024.2   Definitions.
§ 1024.3   E-Sign applicability.
§ 1024.4   Reliance upon rule, regulation, or interpretation by the Bureau.
§ 1024.5   Coverage of RESPA.
Subpart B - Mortgage Settlement and Escrow Accounts § 1024.6–§ 1024.20
§ 1024.6   Special information booklet at time of loan application.
§ 1024.7   Good faith estimate.
§ 1024.8   Use of HUD-1 or HUD-1A settlement statements.
§ 1024.9   Reproduction of settlement statements.
§ 1024.10   One-day advance inspection of HUD-1 or HUD-1A settlement statement; delivery; recordkeeping.
§ 1024.11   Mailing.
§ 1024.12   No fee.
§ 1024.13   [Reserved]
§ 1024.14   Prohibition against kickbacks and unearned fees.
§ 1024.15   Affiliated business arrangements.
§ 1024.16   Title companies.
§ 1024.17   Escrow accounts.
§§ 1024.18--1024.19   [Reserved]
§ 1024.20   List of homeownership counseling organizations.
Subpart C - Mortgage Servicing § 1024.30–§ 1024.41
§ 1024.30   Scope.
§ 1024.31   Definitions.
§ 1024.32   General disclosure requirements.
§ 1024.33   Mortgage servicing transfers.
§ 1024.34   Timely escrow payments and treatment of escrow account balances.
§ 1024.35   Error resolution procedures.
§ 1024.36   Requests for information.
§ 1024.37   Force-placed insurance.
§ 1024.38   General servicing policies, procedures, and requirements.
§ 1024.39   Early intervention requirements for certain borrowers.
§ 1024.40   Continuity of contact.
§ 1024.41   Loss mitigation procedures.
Appendices
Appendix A to Part 1024 — Instructions for Completing HUD-1 and HUD-1a Settlement Statements; Sample HUD-1 and HUD-1a Statements
Appendix B to Part 1024 — Illustrations of Requirements of RESPA
Appendix C to Part 1024 — Instructions for Completing Good Faith Estimate (GFE) Form
Appendix D to Part 1024 — Affiliated Business Arrangement Disclosure Statement Format Notice
Appendix E to Part 1024 — Arithmetic Steps
Appendix MS to Part 1024 — Mortgage Servicing
Appendix MS-1 to Part 1024
Appendix MS-2 to Part 1024
Appendix MS-3 to Part 1024
Appendix MS-4 to Part 1024 — Model Clauses for the Written Early Intervention Notice
Supplement I to Part 1024 - Official Interpretations
Introduction
Comment for 1024.5 Coverage of RESPA
Comment for 1024.17 Escrow Accounts
Comment for  1024.30 - Scope
Comment for  1024.31 - Definitions
Comment for  1024.32 - General Disclosure Requirements.
Comment for  1024.33 - Mortgage Servicing Transfers
Comment for  1024.34 - Timely Escrow Payments and Treatment of Escrow Balances
Comment for  1024.35 - Error Resolution Procedures
Comment for  1024.36 - Requests for Information
Comment for  1024.37 - Force-Placed Insurance
Comment for 1024.38 - General servicing policies, procedures, and requirements.
Comment for  1024.39 - Early Intervention Requirements for Certain Borrowers
Comment for  1024.40 - Continuity of Contact
Comment for  1024.41 - Loss Mitigation Procedures
Comment for Appendix MS to Part 1024 - Mortgage Servicing Model Forms and Clauses
Comment for Appendix MS-3 - Model Force-Placed Insurance Notice Forms
Comment for Appendix MS-4 - Model Clauses for the Written Early Intervention Notice
§ 1024.17   Escrow accounts.
This version is the current regulation
View all versions of this regulation
Search this regulation
Regulation X
(a) General.
This section sets out the requirements for an escrow account that a lender establishes in connection with a federally related mortgage loan. It sets limits for escrow accounts using calculations based on monthly payments and disbursements within a calendar year. If an escrow account involves biweekly or any other payment period, the requirements in this section shall be modified accordingly. A Public Guidance Document entitled “Biweekly Payments - Example” provides examples of biweekly accounting and a Public Guidance Document entitled “Annual Escrow Account Disclosure Statement - Example” provides examples of a 3-year accounting cycle that may be used in accordance with paragraph (c)(9) of this section. A Public Guidance Document entitled “Consumer Disclosure for Voluntary Escrow Account Payments” provides a model disclosure format that originators and servicers are encouraged, but not required, to provide to consumers when the originator or servicer anticipates a substantial increase in disbursements from the escrow account after the first year of the loan. The disclosures in that model format may be combined with or included in the Initial Escrow Account Statement required in §
1024.17(g).
(b) Definitions.
As used in this section:
Aggregate (or) composite analysis,
hereafter called
aggregate analysis,
means an accounting method a servicer uses in conducting an escrow account analysis by computing the sufficiency of escrow account funds by analyzing the account as a whole. Appendix E to this part sets forth examples of aggregate escrow account analyses.
Annual escrow account statement
means a statement containing all of the information set forth in §
1024.17(i).
As noted in §
1024.17(i),
a servicer shall submit an annual escrow account statement to the borrower within 30 calendar days of the end of the escrow account computation year, after conducting an escrow account analysis.
Cushion or reserve
(hereafter cushion) means funds that a servicer may require a borrower to pay into an escrow account to cover unanticipated disbursements or disbursements made before the borrower's payments are available in the account, as limited by §
1024.17(c).
Deficiency
is the amount of a negative balance in an escrow account. As noted in §
1024.17(f),
if a servicer advances funds for a borrower, then the servicer must perform an escrow account analysis before seeking repayment of the deficiency.
Delivery
means the placing of a document in the United States mail, first-class postage paid, addressed to the last known address of the recipient. Hand delivery also constitutes delivery.
Disbursement date
means the date on which the servicer actually pays an escrow item from the escrow account.
Escrow account
means any account that a servicer establishes or controls on behalf of a borrower to pay taxes, insurance premiums (including flood insurance), or other charges with respect to a federally related mortgage loan, including charges that the borrower and servicer have voluntarily agreed that the servicer should collect and pay. The definition encompasses any account established for this purpose, including a “trust account”, “reserve account”, “impound account”, or other term in different localities. An “escrow account” includes any arrangement where the servicer adds a portion of the borrower's payments to principal and subsequently deducts from principal the disbursements for escrow account items. For purposes of this section, the term “escrow account” excludes any account that is under the borrower's total control.
Escrow account analysis
means the accounting that a servicer conducts in the form of a trial running balance for an escrow account to:
(1)
Determine the appropriate target balances;
(2)
Compute the borrower's monthly payments for the next escrow account computation year and any deposits needed to establish or maintain the account; and
(3)
Determine whether shortages, surpluses or deficiencies exist.
Escrow account computation year
is a 12-month period that a servicer establishes for the escrow account beginning with the borrower's initial payment date. The term includes each 12-month period thereafter, unless a servicer chooses to issue a short year statement under the conditions stated in §
1024.17(i)(4).
Escrow account item
or
separate item
means any separate expenditure category, such as “taxes” or “insurance”, for which funds are collected in the escrow account for disbursement. An escrow account item with installment payments, such as local property taxes, remains one escrow account item regardless of multiple disbursement dates to the tax authority.
Initial escrow account statement
means the first disclosure statement that the servicer delivers to the borrower concerning the borrower's escrow account. The initial escrow account statement shall meet the requirements of §
1024.17(g)
and be in substantially the format set forth in §
1024.17(h).
Installment payment
means one of two or more payments payable on an escrow account item during an escrow account computation year. An example of an installment payment is where a jurisdiction bills quarterly for taxes.
Payment due date
means the date each month when the borrower's monthly payment to an escrow account is due to the servicer. The initial payment date is the borrower's first payment due date to an escrow account.
Penalty
means a late charge imposed by the payee for paying after the disbursement is due. It does not include any additional charge or fee imposed by the payee associated with choosing installment payments as opposed to annual payments or for choosing one installment plan over another.
Pre-accrual
is a practice some servicers use to require borrowers to deposit funds, needed for disbursement and maintenance of a cushion, in the escrow account some period before the disbursement date. Pre-accrual is subject to the limitations of §
1024.17(c).
Shortage
means an amount by which a current escrow account balance falls short of the target balance at the time of escrow analysis.
Single-item analysis
means an accounting method servicers use in conducting an escrow account analysis by computing the sufficiency of escrow account funds by considering each escrow item separately. Appendix E to this part sets forth examples of single-item analysis.
Submission
(of an escrow account statement) means the delivery of the statement.
Surplus
means an amount by which the current escrow account balance exceeds the target balance for the account.
System of recordkeeping
means the servicer's method of keeping information that reflects the facts relating to that servicer's handling of the borrower's escrow account, including, but not limited to, the payment of amounts from the escrow account and the submission of initial and annual escrow account statements to borrowers.
Target balance
means the estimated month end balance in an escrow account that is just sufficient to cover the remaining disbursements from the escrow account in the escrow account computation year, taking into account the remaining scheduled periodic payments, and a cushion, if any.
Trial running balance
means the accounting process that derives the target balances over the course of an escrow account computation year. Section
1024.17(d)
provides a description of the steps involved in performing a trial running balance.
(c) Limits on payments to escrow accounts.
(1)
A lender or servicer (hereafter servicer) shall not require a borrower to deposit into any escrow account, created in connection with a federally related mortgage loan, more than the following amounts:
(i) Charges at settlement or upon creation of an escrow account.
At the time a servicer creates an escrow account for a borrower, the servicer may charge the borrower an amount sufficient to pay the charges respecting the mortgaged property, such as taxes and insurance, which are attributable to the period from the date such payment(s) were last paid until the initial payment date. The “amount sufficient to pay” is computed so that the lowest month end target balance projected for the escrow account computation year is zero (-0-) (see Step 2 in appendix E to this part). In addition, the servicer may charge the borrower a cushion that shall be no greater than one-sixth (1/6) of the estimated total annual payments from the escrow account.
(ii) Charges during the life of the escrow account.
Throughout the life of an escrow account, the servicer may charge the borrower a monthly sum equal to one-twelfth (1/12) of the total annual escrow payments which the servicer reasonably anticipates paying from the account. In addition, the servicer may add an amount to maintain a cushion no greater than one-sixth (1/6) of the estimated total annual payments from the account. However, if a servicer determines through an escrow account analysis that there is a shortage or deficiency, the servicer may require the borrower to pay additional deposits to make up the shortage or eliminate the deficiency, subject to the limitations set forth in §
1024.17(f).
(2) Escrow analysis at creation of escrow account.
Before establishing an escrow account, the servicer must conduct an escrow account analysis to determine the amount the borrower must deposit into the escrow account (subject to the limitations of paragraph (c)(1)(i) of this section), and the amount of the borrower's periodic payments into the escrow account (subject to the limitations of paragraph (c)(1)(ii) of this section). In conducting the escrow account analysis, the servicer must estimate the disbursement amounts according to paragraph (c)(7) of this section. Pursuant to paragraph (k) of this section, the servicer must use a date on or before the deadline to avoid a penalty as the disbursement date for the escrow item and comply with any other requirements of paragraph (k) of this section. Upon completing the initial escrow account analysis, the servicer must prepare and deliver an initial escrow account statement to the borrower, as set forth in paragraph (g) of this section. The servicer must use the escrow account analysis to determine whether a surplus, shortage, or deficiency exists and must make any adjustments to the account pursuant to paragraph (f) of this section.
(3) Subsequent escrow account analyses.
For each escrow account, the servicer must conduct an escrow account analysis at the completion of the escrow account computation year to determine the borrower's monthly escrow account payments for the next computation year, subject to the limitations of paragraph (c)(1)(ii) of this section. In conducting the escrow account analysis, the servicer must estimate the disbursement amounts according to paragraph (c)(7) of this section. Pursuant to paragraph (k) of this section, the servicer must use a date on or before the deadline to avoid a penalty as the disbursement date for the escrow item and comply with any other requirements of paragraph (k) of this section. The servicer must use the escrow account analysis to determine whether a surplus, shortage, or deficiency exists, and must make any adjustments to the account pursuant to paragraph (f) of this section. Upon completing an escrow account analysis, the servicer must prepare and submit an annual escrow account statement to the borrower, as set forth in paragraph (i) of this section.
(4) Aggregate accounting required.
All servicers must use the aggregate accounting method in conducting escrow account analyses.
(5) Cushion.
The cushion must be no greater than one-sixth (1/6) of the estimated total annual disbursements from the escrow account.
(6) Restrictions on pre-accrual.
A servicer must not practice pre-accrual.
(7) Servicer estimates of disbursement amounts.
To conduct an escrow account analysis, the servicer shall estimate the amount of escrow account items to be disbursed. If the servicer knows the charge for an escrow item in the next computation year, then the servicer shall use that amount in estimating disbursement amounts. If the charge is unknown to the servicer, the servicer may base the estimate on the preceding year's charge, or the preceding year's charge as modified by an amount not exceeding the most recent year's change in the national Consumer Price Index for all urban consumers (CPI, all items). In cases of unassessed new construction, the servicer may base an estimate on the assessment of comparable residential property in the market area.
(8) Provisions in federally related mortgage documents.
The servicer must examine the federally related mortgage loan documents to determine the applicable cushion for each escrow account. If any such documents provide for lower cushion limits, then the terms of the loan documents apply. Where the terms of any such documents allow greater payments to an escrow account than allowed by this section, then this section controls the applicable limits. Where such documents do not specifically establish an escrow account, whether a servicer may establish an escrow account for the loan is a matter for determination by other Federal or State law. If such documents are silent on the escrow account limits and a servicer establishes an escrow account under other Federal or State law, then the limitations of this section apply unless applicable Federal or State law provides for a lower amount. If such documents provide for escrow accounts up to the RESPA limits, then the servicer may require the maximum amounts consistent with this section, unless an applicable Federal or State law sets a lesser amount.
(9) Assessments for periods longer than one year.
Some escrow account items may be billed for periods longer than one year. For example, servicers may need to collect flood insurance or water purification escrow funds for payment every three years. In such cases, the servicer shall estimate the borrower's payments for a full cycle of disbursements. For a flood insurance premium payable every 3 years, the servicer shall collect the payments reflecting 36 equal monthly amounts. For two out of the three years, however, the account balance may not reach its low monthly balance because the low point will be on a three-year cycle, as compared to an annual one. The annual escrow account statement shall explain this situation (see example in the Public Guidance Document entitled “Annual Escrow Account Disclosure Statement - Example”, available in accordance with §
1024.3).
(d) Methods of escrow account analysis.
(1)
The following sets forth the steps servicers must use to determine whether their use of aggregate analysis conforms with the limitations in §
1024.17(c)(1).
The steps set forth in this section result in maximum limits. Servicers may use accounting procedures that result in lower target balances. In particular, servicers may use a cushion less than the permissible cushion or no cushion at all. This section does not require the use of a cushion.
(2) Aggregate analysis.
(i)
In conducting the escrow account analysis using aggregate analysis, the target balances may not exceed the balances computed according to the following arithmetic operations:
(A)
The servicer first projects a trial balance for the account as a whole over the next computation year (a trial running balance). In doing so the servicer assumes that it will make estimated disbursements on or before the earlier of the deadline to take advantage of discounts, if available, or the deadline to avoid a penalty. The servicer does not use pre-accrual on these disbursement dates. The servicer also assumes that the borrower will make monthly payments equal to one-twelfth of the estimated total annual escrow account disbursements.
(B)
The servicer then examines the monthly trial balances and adds to the first monthly balance an amount just sufficient to bring the lowest monthly trial balance to zero, and adjusts all other monthly balances accordingly.
(C)
The servicer then adds to the monthly balances the permissible cushion. The cushion is two months of the borrower's escrow payments to the servicer or a lesser amount specified by state law or the mortgage document (net of any increases or decreases because of prior year shortages or surpluses, respectively).
(ii) Lowest monthly balance.
Under aggregate analysis, the lowest monthly target balance for the account shall be less than or equal to one-sixth of the estimated total annual escrow account disbursements or a lesser amount specified by state law or the mortgage document. The target balances that the servicer derives using these steps yield the maximum limit for the escrow account. Appendix E to this part illustrates these steps.
(e) Transfer of servicing.
(1)
If the new servicer changes either the monthly payment amount or the accounting method used by the transferor (old) servicer, then the new servicer shall provide the borrower with an initial escrow account statement within 60 days of the date of servicing transfer.
(i)
Where a new servicer provides an initial escrow account statement upon the transfer of servicing, the new servicer shall use the effective date of the transfer of servicing to establish the new escrow account computation year.
(ii)
Where the new servicer retains the monthly payments and accounting method used by the transferor servicer, then the new servicer may continue to use the escrow account computation year established by the transferor servicer or may choose to establish a different computation year using a short-year statement. At the completion of the escrow account computation year or any short year, the new servicer shall perform an escrow analysis and provide the borrower with an annual escrow account statement.
(2)
The new servicer shall treat shortages, surpluses and deficiencies in the transferred escrow account according to the procedures set forth in §
1024.17(f).
(f) Shortages, surpluses, and deficiencies requirements
-
(1) Escrow account analysis.
For each escrow account, the servicer shall conduct an escrow account analysis to determine whether a surplus, shortage or deficiency exists.
(i)
As noted in §
1024.17(c)(2)
and (3), the servicer shall conduct an escrow account analysis upon establishing an escrow account and at completion of the escrow account computation year.
(ii)
The servicer may conduct an escrow account analysis at other times during the escrow computation year. If a servicer advances funds in paying a disbursement, which is not the result of a borrower's payment default under the underlying mortgage document, then the servicer shall conduct an escrow account analysis to determine the extent of the deficiency before seeking repayment of the funds from the borrower under this paragraph (f).
(2) Surpluses.
(i)
If an escrow account analysis discloses a surplus, the servicer shall, within 30 days from the date of the analysis, refund the surplus to the borrower if the surplus is greater than or equal to 50 dollars ($50). If the surplus is less than 50 dollars ($50), the servicer may refund such amount to the borrower, or credit such amount against the next year's escrow payments.
(ii)
These provisions regarding surpluses apply if the borrower is current at the time of the escrow account analysis. A borrower is current if the servicer receives the borrower's payments within 30 days of the payment due date. If the servicer does not receive the borrower's payment within 30 days of the payment due date, then the servicer may retain the surplus in the escrow account pursuant to the terms of the federally related mortgage loan documents.
(iii)
After an initial or annual escrow analysis has been performed, the servicer and the borrower may enter into a voluntary agreement for the forthcoming escrow accounting year for the borrower to deposit funds into the escrow account for that year greater than the limits established under paragraph (c) of this section. Such an agreement shall cover only one escrow accounting year, but a new voluntary agreement may be entered into after the next escrow analysis is performed. The voluntary agreement may not alter how surpluses are to be treated when the next escrow analysis is performed at the end of the escrow accounting year covered by the voluntary agreement.
(3) Shortages.
(i)
If an escrow account analysis discloses a shortage of less than one month's escrow account payment, then the servicer has three possible courses of action:
(A)
The servicer may allow a shortage to exist and do nothing to change it;
(B)
The servicer may require the borrower to repay the shortage amount within 30 days; or
(C)
The servicer may require the borrower to repay the shortage amount in equal monthly payments over at least a 12-month period.
(ii)
If an escrow account analysis discloses a shortage that is greater than or equal to one month's escrow account payment, then the servicer has two possible courses of action:
(A)
The servicer may allow a shortage to exist and do nothing to change it; or
(B)
The servicer may require the borrower to repay the shortage in equal monthly payments over at least a 12-month period.
(4) Deficiency.
If the escrow account analysis confirms a deficiency, then the servicer may require the borrower to pay additional monthly deposits to the account to eliminate the deficiency.
(i)
If the deficiency is less than one month's escrow account payment, then the servicer:
(A)
May allow the deficiency to exist and do nothing to change it;
(B)
May require the borrower to repay the deficiency within 30 days; or
(C)
May require the borrower to repay the deficiency in 2 or more equal monthly payments.
(ii)
If the deficiency is greater than or equal to 1 month's escrow payment, the servicer may allow the deficiency to exist and do nothing to change it or may require the borrower to repay the deficiency in two or more equal monthly payments.
(iii)
These provisions regarding deficiencies apply if the borrower is current at the time of the escrow account analysis. A borrower is current if the servicer receives the borrower's payments within 30 days of the payment due date. If the servicer does not receive the borrower's payment within 30 days of the payment due date, then the servicer may recover the deficiency pursuant to the terms of the federally related mortgage loan documents.
(5) Notice of shortage or deficiency in escrow account.
The servicer shall notify the borrower at least once during the escrow account computation year if there is a shortage or deficiency in the escrow account. The notice may be part of the annual escrow account statement or it may be a separate document.
(g) Initial escrow account statement
-
(1) Submission at settlement, or within 45 calendar days of settlement.
As noted in §
1024.17(c)(2),
the servicer shall conduct an escrow account analysis before establishing an escrow account to determine the amount the borrower shall deposit into the escrow account, subject to the limitations of §
1024.17(c)(1)(i).
After conducting the escrow account analysis for each escrow account, the servicer shall submit an initial escrow account statement to the borrower at settlement or within 45 calendar days of settlement for escrow accounts that are established as a condition of the loan.
(i)
The initial escrow account statement shall include the amount of the borrower's monthly mortgage payment and the portion of the monthly payment going into the escrow account and shall itemize the estimated taxes, insurance premiums, and other charges that the servicer reasonably anticipates to be paid from the escrow account during the escrow account computation year and the anticipated disbursement dates of those charges. The initial escrow account statement shall indicate the amount that the servicer selects as a cushion. The statement shall include a trial running balance for the account.
(ii)
Pursuant to §
1024.17(h)(2),
the servicer may incorporate the initial escrow account statement into the HUD-1 or HUD-1A settlement statement. If the servicer does not incorporate the initial escrow account statement into the HUD-1 or HUD-1A settlement statement, then the servicer shall submit the initial escrow account statement to the borrower as a separate document.
(2) Time of submission of initial escrow account statement for an escrow account established after settlement.
For escrow accounts established after settlement (and which are not a condition of the loan), a servicer shall submit an initial escrow account statement to a borrower within 45 calendar days of the date of establishment of the escrow account.
(h) Format for initial escrow account statement.
(1)
The format and a completed example for an initial escrow account statement are set out in Public Guidance Documents entitled “Initial Escrow Account Disclosure Statement - Format” and “Initial Escrow Account Disclosure Statement - Example,” available in accordance with the direction in the definition of
Public Guidance Documents
in §
1024.2.
(2) Incorporation of initial escrow account statement into HUD-1 or HUD-1A settlement statement.
Pursuant to §
1024.9(a)(11),
a servicer may add the initial escrow account statement to the HUD-1 or HUD-1A settlement statement. The servicer may include the initial escrow account statement in the basic text or may attach the initial escrow account statement as an additional page to the HUD-1 or HUD-1A settlement statement.
(3) Identification of payees.
The initial escrow account statement need not identify a specific payee by name if it provides sufficient information to identify the use of the funds. For example, appropriate entries include: county taxes, hazard insurance, condominium dues,
etc.
If a particular payee, such as a taxing body, receives more than one payment during the escrow account computation year, the statement shall indicate each payment and disbursement date. If there are several taxing authorities or insurers, the statement shall identify each taxing body or insurer (
e.g.,
“City Taxes”, “School Taxes”, “Hazard Insurance”, or “Flood Insurance,”
etc.
).
(i) Annual escrow account statements.
For each escrow account, a servicer shall submit an annual escrow account statement to the borrower within 30 days of the completion of the escrow account computation year. The servicer shall also submit to the borrower the previous year's projection or initial escrow account statement. The servicer shall conduct an escrow account analysis before submitting an annual escrow account statement to the borrower.
(1) Contents of annual escrow account statement.
The annual escrow account statement shall provide an account history, reflecting the activity in the escrow account during the escrow account computation year, and a projection of the activity in the account for the next year. In preparing the statement, the servicer may assume scheduled payments and disbursements will be made for the final 2 months of the escrow account computation year. The annual escrow account statement must include, at a minimum, the following (the items in paragraphs (i)(1)(i) through (i)(1)(iv) must be clearly itemized):
(i)
The amount of the borrower's current monthly mortgage payment and the portion of the monthly payment going into the escrow account;
(ii)
The amount of the past year's monthly mortgage payment and the portion of the monthly payment that went into the escrow account;
(iii)
The total amount paid into the escrow account during the past computation year;
(iv)
The total amount paid out of the escrow account during the same period for taxes, insurance premiums, and other charges (as separately identified);
(v)
The balance in the escrow account at the end of the period;
(vi)
An explanation of how any surplus is being handled by the servicer;
(vii)
An explanation of how any shortage or deficiency is to be paid by the borrower; and
(viii)
If applicable, the reason(s) why the estimated low monthly balance was not reached, as indicated by noting differences between the most recent account history and last year's projection. Public Guidance Documents entitled “Annual Escrow Account Disclosure Statement - Format” and “Annual Escrow Account Disclosure Statement - Example” set forth an acceptable format and methodology for conveying this information.
(2) No annual statements in the case of default, foreclosure, or bankruptcy.
This paragraph (i)(2) contains an exemption from the provisions of §
1024.17(i)(1).
If at the time the servicer conducts the escrow account analysis the borrower is more than 30 days overdue, then the servicer is exempt from the requirements of submitting an annual escrow account statement to the borrower under §
1024.17(i).
This exemption also applies in situations where the servicer has brought an action for foreclosure under the underlying federally related mortgage loan, or where the borrower is in bankruptcy proceedings. If the servicer does not issue an annual statement pursuant to this exemption and the loan subsequently is reinstated or otherwise becomes current, the servicer shall provide a history of the account since the last annual statement (which may be longer than 1 year) within 90 days of the date the account became current.
(3) Delivery with other material.
The servicer may deliver the annual escrow account statement to the borrower with other statements or materials, including the Substitute 1098, which is provided for Federal income tax purposes.
(4) Short year statements.
A servicer may issue a short year annual escrow account statement (“short year statement”) to change one escrow account computation year to another. By using a short year statement a servicer may adjust its production schedule or alter the escrow account computation year for the escrow account.
(i) Effect of short year statement.
The short year statement shall end the “escrow account computation year” for the escrow account and establish the beginning date of the new escrow account computation year. The servicer shall deliver the short year statement to the borrower within 60 days from the end of the short year.
(ii) Short year statement upon servicing transfer.
Upon the transfer of servicing, the transferor (old) servicer shall submit a short year statement to the borrower within 60 days of the effective date of transfer.
(iii) Short year statement upon loan payoff.
If a borrower pays off a federally related mortgage loan during the escrow account computation year, the servicer shall submit a short year statement to the borrower within 60 days after receiving the payoff funds.
(j) Formats for annual escrow account statement.
The formats and completed examples for annual escrow account statements using single-item analysis (pre-rule accounts) and aggregate analysis are set out in Public Guidance Documents entitled “Annual Escrow Account Disclosure Statement - Format” and “Annual Escrow Account Disclosure Statement - Example”.
(k) Timely payments.
Official interpretation of 17(k) Timely payments.
See interpretation of 17(k) Timely payments. in Supplement I
(1)
If the terms of any federally related mortgage loan require the borrower to make payments to an escrow account, the servicer must pay the disbursements in a timely manner, that is, on or before the deadline to avoid a penalty, as long as the borrower's payment is not more than 30 days overdue.
(2)
The servicer must advance funds to make disbursements in a timely manner as long as the borrower's payment is not more than 30 days overdue. Upon advancing funds to pay a disbursement, the servicer may seek repayment from the borrower for the deficiency pursuant to paragraph (f) of this section.
(3)
For the payment of property taxes from the escrow account, if a taxing jurisdiction offers a servicer a choice between annual and installment disbursements, the servicer must also comply with this paragraph (k)(3). If the taxing jurisdiction neither offers a discount for disbursements on a lump sum annual basis nor imposes any additional charge or fee for installment disbursements, the servicer must make disbursements on an installment basis. If, however, the taxing jurisdiction offers a discount for disbursements on a lump sum annual basis or imposes any additional charge or fee for installment disbursements, the servicer may, at the servicer's discretion (but is not required by RESPA to), make lump sum annual disbursements in order to take advantage of the discount for the borrower or avoid the additional charge or fee for installments, as long as such method of disbursement complies with paragraphs (k)(1) and (k)(2) of this section. The Bureau encourages, but does not require, the servicer to follow the preference of the borrower, if such preference is known to the servicer.
(4)
Notwithstanding paragraph (k)(3) of this section, a servicer and borrower may mutually agree, on an individual case basis, to a different disbursement basis (installment or annual) or disbursement date for property taxes from that required under paragraph (k)(3) of this section, so long as the agreement meets the requirements of paragraphs (k)(1) and (k)(2) of this section. The borrower must voluntarily agree; neither loan approval nor any term of the loan may be conditioned on the borrower's agreeing to a different disbursement basis or disbursement date.
(5) Timely payment of hazard insurance
-
Official interpretation of 17(k)(5) Timely payment of hazard insurance.
See interpretation of 17(k)(5) Timely payment of hazard insurance. in Supplement I
(i) In general.
Except as provided in paragraph (k)(5)(iii) of this section, with respect to a borrower whose mortgage payment is more than 30 days overdue, but who has established an escrow account for the payment for hazard insurance, as defined in §
1024.31,
a servicer may not purchase force-placed insurance, as that term is defined in §
1024.37(a),
unless a servicer is unable to disburse funds from the borrower's escrow account to ensure that the borrower's hazard insurance premium charges are paid in a timely manner.
(ii) Inability to disburse funds
-
Official interpretation of 17(k)(5)(ii) Inability to disburse funds.
See interpretation of 17(k)(5)(ii) Inability to disburse funds. in Supplement I
(A) When inability exists.
A servicer is considered unable to disburse funds from a borrower's escrow account to ensure that the borrower's hazard insurance premiums are paid in a timely manner only if the servicer has a reasonable basis to believe either that the borrower's hazard insurance has been canceled (or was not renewed) for reasons other than nonpayment of premium charges or that the borrower's property is vacant.
Official interpretation of 17(k)(5)(ii)(A)When inability exists.
1.
Examples of reasonable basis to believe that a policy has been cancelled or not renewed.
The following are examples of where a servicer has a reasonable basis to believe that a borrower's hazard insurance policy has been canceled or not renewed for reasons other than the nonpayment of premium charges:
i. A borrower notifies a servicer that the borrower has cancelled the hazard insurance coverage, and the servicer has not received notification of other hazard insurance coverage.
ii. A servicer receives a notification of cancellation or non-renewal from the borrower's insurance company before payment is due on the borrower's hazard insurance.
iii. A servicer does not receive a payment notice by the expiration date of the borrower's hazard insurance policy.
See interpretation of 17(k)(5)(ii)(A)When inability exists. in Supplement I
(B) When inability does not exist.
A servicer shall not be considered unable to disburse funds from the borrower's escrow account because the escrow account contains insufficient funds for paying hazard insurance premium charges.
(C) Recoupment of advances.
If a servicer advances funds to an escrow account to ensure that the borrower's hazard insurance premium charges are paid in a timely manner, a servicer may seek repayment from the borrower for the funds the servicer advanced, unless otherwise prohibited by applicable law.
Official interpretation of 17(k)(5)(ii)(C) Recoupment for advances.
1.
Month-to-month advances.
A servicer that advances the premium payment to be disbursed from an escrow account may advance the payment on a month-to-month basis, if permitted by State or other applicable law and accepted by the borrower's hazard insurance company.
See interpretation of 17(k)(5)(ii)(C) Recoupment for advances. in Supplement I
(iii) Small servicers.
Notwithstanding paragraphs (k)(5)(i) and (k)(5)(ii)(B) of this section and subject to the requirements in §
1024.37,
a servicer that qualifies as a small servicer pursuant to 12 CFR
1026.41(e)(4)
may purchase force-placed insurance and charge the cost of that insurance to the borrower if the cost to the borrower of the force-placed insurance is less than the amount the small servicer would need to disburse from the borrower's escrow account to ensure that the borrower's hazard insurance premium charges were paid in a timely manner.
(l) Discretionary payments.
Any borrower's discretionary payment (such as credit life or disability insurance) made as part of a monthly mortgage payment is to be noted on the initial and annual statements. If a discretionary payment is established or terminated during the escrow account computation year, this change should be noted on the next annual statement. A discretionary payment is not part of the escrow account unless the payment is required by the lender, in accordance with the definition of “settlement service” in §
1024.2,
or the servicer chooses to place the discretionary payment in the escrow account. If a servicer has not established an escrow account for a federally related mortgage loan and only receives payments for discretionary items, this section is not applicable.
Previous section -
§ 1024.16
§ 1024.16   Title companies.
Next section -
§ 1024.19
§§ 1024.18--1024.19   [Reserved]
Back to top
About Us
Contact Us
Careers
Events
Industry Whistleblowers
CFPB Ombudsman
FOIA
Privacy
Website Privacy Policy & Legal Notices
Data
Open Government
Information Quality Guidelines
Diversity & Inclusion
Administrative Adjudication
Plain Writing
Accessibility
Office of Civil Rights
No FEAR Act & Cummings Act
Tribal
USA.gov
Office of Inspector General
An official website of the
United States government